.. include:: shortcuts.txt

Testing if forcing data is used correctly
------------------------------------------

It is very important to ensure that selected forcing options produce the result you
expect: we find that the ice sheet response is very sensitive to provided climate forcing,
especially in short-scale simulations.

This section describes how to use PISM to inspect climate forcing.

Visualizing climate inputs, without ice dynamics
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Recall that internally in PISM there is a :ref:`separation of climate inputs from ice
dynamics <sec-climate-inputs>`. This makes it possible to turn "off" the ice dynamics
code to visualize the climate mass balance and temperature boundary conditions produced
using a combination of options and input files. This is helpful during the process of
creating PISM-readable data files, and modeling with such.

To do this, use the option :opt:`-test_climate_models` (which is equivalent to
:opt:`-stress_balance none` and :opt:`-energy none`) together with PISM's reporting
capabilities (:opt:`-extra_file`, :opt:`-extra_times`, :opt:`-extra_vars`).

Turning "off" ice dynamics saves computational time while allowing one to use the same
options as in an actual modeling run. Note that :opt:`-test_climate_models` does *not*
disable geometry updates, so one can check if surface elevation feedbacks modeled using
lapse rates (and similar) work correctly. Please use the :opt:`-no_mass` command-line
option to fix ice geometry. (This may be necessary if the mass balance rate data would
result in extreme ice sheet growth that is not balanced by ice flow in this setup.

As an example, set up an ice sheet state file and check if climate data is read in
correctly:

.. code-block:: none

   mpiexec -n 2 pisms -eisII A -y 1000 -o state.nc
   pismr -i state.nc -surface given -extra_times 0.0:0.1:2.5 \
         -extra_file movie.nc -extra_vars climatic_mass_balance,ice_surface_temp \
         -ys 0 -ye 2.5

Using ``pisms`` merely generates demonstration climate data, using EISMINT II choices
:cite:`EISMINT00`. The next run extracts the surface mass balance :var:`climatic_mass_balance`
and surface temperature :var:`ice_surface_temp` from ``state.nc``. It then does nothing
interesting, exactly because a constant climate is used. Viewing ``movie.nc`` we see these
same values as from ``state.nc``, in variables :var:`climatic_mass_balance`,
:var:`ice_surface_temp`, reported back to us as the time- and space-dependent climate at
times ``ys:dt:ye``. It is a boring "movie."

A more interesting example uses a :ref:`positive degree-day scheme <sec-surface-pdd>`).
This scheme uses a variable called :var:`precipitation`, and a calculation of melting, to
get the surface mass balance :var:`climatic_mass_balance`.

Assuming that ``g20km_10ka.nc`` was created :ref:`as described in the User's Manual
<sec-runscript>`, running

.. code-block:: none

    pismr -test_climate_models -no_mass -i g20km_10ka.nc \
          -atmosphere searise_greenland -surface pdd \
          -ys 0 -ye 1 -extra_times 0:1week:1 \
          -extra_file foo.nc \
          -extra_vars climatic_mass_balance,ice_surface_temp,air_temp_snapshot,precipitation
    
produces ``foo.nc``. Viewing in with ``ncview`` shows an annual cycle in the variable
:var:`air_temp` and a noticeable decrease in the surface mass balance during summer months
(see variable :var:`climatic_mass_balance`). Note that :var:`ice_surface_temp` is constant
in time: this is the temperature *at the ice surface but below firn* and it does not
include seasonal variations :cite:`Hock05`.

Using low-resolution test runs
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Sometimes a run like the one above is still too costly. In this case it might be helpful
to replace it with a similar run on a coarser grid, with or without the option
:opt:`-test_climate_models`. (Testing climate inputs usually means checking if the timing
of modeled events is right, and high spatial resolution is not essential.)

The command

.. code-block:: none

    pismr -i g20km_pre100.nc -bootstrap -Mx 51 -My 101 -Mz 11 \
          -atmosphere searise_greenland \
          -surface pdd -ys 0 -ye 2.5 \
          -extra_file foo.nc -extra_times 0:0.1:2.5 \
          -extra_vars climatic_mass_balance,air_temp_snapshot,smelt,srunoff,saccum
          -ts_file ts.nc -ts_times 0:0.1:2.5 \
          -o bar.nc

will produce ``foo.nc`` containing a "movie" very similar to the one created by the
previous run, but including the full influence of ice dynamics.

In addition to ``foo.nc``, the latter command will produce ``ts.nc`` containing scalar
time-series. The variable ``surface_ice_flux`` (the *total over the ice-covered area* of
the surface mass flux) can be used to detect if climate forcing is applied at the right
time.

Visualizing the climate inputs in the Greenland case
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Assuming that ``g20km_pre100.nc`` was produced by the run described in section
:ref:`sec-start`), one can run the following to check if the PDD model in PISM (see
section :ref:`sec-surface-pdd`) is "reasonable":

.. code-block:: none

   pismr -i g20km_pre100.nc -atmosphere searise_greenland,paleo_precip \
         -surface pdd -atmosphere_paleo_precip_file pism_dT.nc \
         -extra_times 0:1week:3 -ys 0 -ye 3 \
         -extra_file pddmovie.nc -o_order zyx \
         -extra_vars climatic_mass_balance,air_temp_snapshot

This produces the file ``pddmovie.nc`` with several variables:
:var:`climatic_mass_balance` (instantaneous net accumulation (ablation) rate),
:var:`air_temp_snapshot` (instantaneous near-surface air temperature),
:var:`precipitation` (mean annual ice-equivalent precipitation rate) and some others.

The variable :var:`precipitation` does not evolve over time because it is part of the
SeaRISE-Greenland data and is read in from the input file.

The other two variables were used to create figure :numref:`fig-pddseries`, which shows
the time-series of the accumulation rate (top graph) and the air temperature (bottom
graph) with the map view of the surface elevation on the left.

Here are two things to notice:

#. The summer peak day is in the right place. The default for this value is July 15 (day
   `196`, at approximately `196/365 \simeq 0.54` year). (If it is important, the peak day
   can be changed using the configuration parameter
   :config:`atmosphere.fausto_air_temp.summer_peak_day`).

#. Lows of the surface mass balance rate :var:`climatic_mass_balance` correspond to
   positive degree-days in the given period, because of highs of the air temperature.
   Recall the air temperature graph does not show random daily variations. Even though it
   has the maximum of about `266` Kelvin, the parameterized instantaneous air
   temperature can be above freezing. A positive value for positive degree-days is
   expected :cite:`CalovGreve05`.

.. figure:: figures/pdd-movie.png
   :name: fig-pddseries

   Time series of the surface mass balance rate and near-surface air temperature.

We can also test the surface temperature forcing code with the following command.

.. code-block:: none

    pismr -i g20km_pre100.nc -surface simple \
          -atmosphere searise_greenland,delta_T \
          -atmosphere_delta_T_file pism_dT.nc \
          -extra_times 100 -ys -125e3 -ye 0 \
          -extra_vars ice_surface_temp \
          -extra_file dT_movie.nc -o_order zyx \
          -test_climate_models -no_mass
    
The output ``dT_movie.nc`` and ``pism_dT.nc`` were used to create
:numref:`fig-artm-timeseries`.

This figure shows the GRIP temperature offsets and the time-series of the temperature at
the ice surface at a point in southern Greenland (bottom graph), confirming that the
temperature offsets are used correctly.

.. figure:: figures/dT-movie.png
   :name: fig-artm-timeseries

   Time series of the surface temperature compared to GRIP temperature offsets

