.. include:: ../../../global.txt

.. _sec-time:

Model time
----------

:numref:`tab-timeoptions` gives the command-line options which control PISM time. If
option ``-ys`` is absent then the start year is read from the input file (if present) or
it defaults to zero. The default value for the end year is the start year plus the given
(``-y``) run length. If both ``-ys`` and ``-ye`` are used then the run length is set to
the difference. Using all three of ``-ys``, ``-y`` and ``-ys`` is not allowed; this
generates an error message.

.. list-table:: Command-line options controlling PISM time
   :name: tab-timeoptions
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20, 80

   * - Option
     - Description
   * - :opt:`-y` (years)
     - Number of model years to run.
   * - :opt:`-ys` (years)
     - Model year at which to start the run. Also resets the model
       time, ignoring any time in the input file.
   * - :opt:`-ye` (years)
     - Model year at which to end the run.

.. _sec-calendars:

Calendars
^^^^^^^^^

Most of PISM, and its ice dynamics core in particular, only needs to know the length of
the current time-step. Internally PISM stores time in "seconds since a specified moment"
and thus PISM generally does not use or need a calendar. [#]_ We refer to PISM internal
time as *model time*.

One can select a calendar for more precise control of the model time, however. A
"calendar" is a concept that is part of the `CF Conventions`_. Choosing a calendar is
appropriate for runs for specific temporal periods like "the 18th-century" or
"1989--2010". The calendar is generally needed because specific knowledge of lengths of
months and years is required to use climate data properly or to facilitate model
validation.

PISM uses CalCalcs_ by David W. Pierce to perform calendric computations. This lets us
support all the `calendars <CF-Calendars_>`_ defined by the CF Metadata Conventions
document except for the ``366_day`` (``all_leap``) calendar.

Time units in PISM's output files always contain a reference date because it is required
by the CF metadata conventions.

By default PISM uses the ``365_day`` calendar. This is appropriate for runs that do not
require precise application of forcing data or reporting on particular dates
(paleo-climate runs, for example). In this mode PISM ignores the reference date in time
unit specifications (such as "``days since 1969-7-20``"), though the value set using
:config:`time.reference_date` configuration parameter is saved in (is passed forward into)
output files.

The calendar setting also affects the year length. In particular, with the default choice
of the calendar (``365_day``), ``-y 10`` sets the run duration to

.. math::

   10 \times 365 \times 24 \times 60 \times 60 = 315360000

seconds, not `10 \times 365.25 \times 24 \times 60 \times 60` or similar.

.. note::

   This does **not** affect unit conversion: the factor used to convert `m/s` to
   `m/\text{year}` does not depend on the calendar choice.

.. list-table:: Calendars supported by PISM. Please see CalCalcs_ documentation for
                details
   :name: tab-calendars
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 1, 3

   * - Keyword
     - Meaning
   * - ``gregorian`` or ``standard``
     - Mixed Gregorian/Julian calendar used today.
   * - ``proleptic_gregorian``
     - Gregorian calendar extended to dates before 1582-10-15.
   * - ``noleap`` or ``365_day``
     - Calendar with fixed-length 365-day years
   * - ``360_day``
     - Calendar with fixed-length 360-day years divided into 30-day months
   * - ``julian``
     - Julian calendar 
   * - ``none``
     - no calendar

Selecting a non-trivial (Gregorian, Proleptic Gregorian, or Julian) calendar using the
:config:`time.calendar` configuration parameter or the :opt:`-calendar` command-line
option enables calendar-based time management; see :numref:`tab-calendars`. The
implications of selecting such a calendar are:

- PISM uses the ``units`` attribute of coordinate variables *literally* (including the
  reference date) in unit conversions. Please make sure that the :var:`time` variable in
  all forcing files has the units attribute such as "``days since 2012-1-1``". PISM will
  stop with an error message if a time variable does not have a reference date in its unit
  specification.

- It is important to use units that are a fixed multiple of "seconds", such as "``minutes
  since 1989-1-1``" or "``days since 1999-12-31``" and avoid "months" and "years". (PISM
  uses UDUNITS-2 to convert units, and in UDUNITS one month is always interpreted as
  `\frac{1}{12}\cdot 365.242198781` days.) Please see the `CF Conventions`_ document
  for details.

- PISM uses dates in standard output:

  .. code-block:: none

     ...
        time interval (length)   [2012-01-01, 2021-12-31]  (10.000 years)
     ...
     S 2012-05-26:  0.00011    0.6306   0.00000000           0.00000
     $v$Eh m (dt=0.10000)
     S 2012-07-01:  0.00014    0.6306   0.00000000           0.00000

  Just like in the no-calendar mode, run length, run start and run end times are specified
  using :opt:`-y`, :opt:`-ys` and :opt:`-ye` command-line options, respectively. Arguments
  of these options are interpreted in a slightly different manner, though:

- the run length option ``-y`` takes an *integer* argument, interpreted as the number of
  *calendar* years

- options ``-ys`` and ``-ye`` take *dates* as arguments.

For example, either of the following commands sets up a run covering the `21^{st}`
century:

.. code-block:: none

   pismr -calendar gregorian -ys 2001-1-1 -y 100 ...
   pismr -calendar standard -ys 2001-1-1 -ye 2101-1-1 ...

(These option combinations are equivalent.)

It is also possible to run PISM for the duration of the available forcing data using the
:opt:`-time_file` option. The command

.. code-block:: none

   pismr -calendar gregorian -time_file forcing.nc

will extract the reference date and run length from ``forcing.nc``, respecting time
bounds.

When a non-trivial calendar is selected, spatial and scalar time-series can be saved
daily, monthly or yearly using these calendric computations. See sections
:ref:`sec-saving-time-series` and :ref:`sec-saving-diagnostics`.

.. _sec-time-file-restart:

Re-starting an interrupted run using ``-time_file``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If a run using ``-time_file`` gets interrupted but manages to save a backup, re-starting
with ``-time_file`` will attempt to re-do the entire run because options ``-y``, ``-ys``,
and ``-ye`` are ignored:

.. code-block:: bash

   # This run gets killed but leaves backup.nc:
   pismr -i input.nc -time_file time.nc -o output.nc
   # This WILL NOT start from the time saved in backup.nc
   # and continue until the end time in time.nc
   pismr -i backup.nc -time_file time.nc -o output.nc

In this case we want to set the start time of the run from ``backup.nc``, but use the end
time from ``time.nc``. To achieve this, use the option :opt:`-time_file_continue_run`.

.. code-block:: bash

   # This run gets killed but leaves backup.nc:
   pismr -i input.nc -time_file time.nc -o output.nc
   # This WILL continue until the end time in time.nc, starting from backup.nc
   pismr -i backup.nc -time_file time.nc -o output.nc -time_file_continue_run

.. _sec-diagnostic-computations:

Diagnostic computations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A "diagnostic" computation can be defined as one where the internal state does not evolve.
The internal state of PISM is the set of variables read by "``-i``". You can ask PISM to
do a diagnostic computation by setting the run duration to a small number such as
`0.001` years (about `9` hours). The duration to use depends on the modeling
setup, but should be smaller than the maximum time-step allowed by PISM's stability
criteria. Such short runs can also be used to look at additional fields corresponding to
the current model state.

As an example, consider these two runs:

.. code-block:: none

   pisms -y 6000 -o foo.nc
   pismr -i foo.nc -y 0.001 -o bar.nc -o_size big

The result of the second (short) run is a NetCDF file ``bar.nc`` which contains the full
three-dimensional velocity field in the scalar NetCDF variables ``uvel``, ``vvel``, and
``wvel``, as well as many other variables. The file ``foo.nc`` does not contain many of
these fields because it was written with the default output size of ``medium``. The "``-y
0.001``" run has diagnostically "filled-in" all the fields which PISM can model at a time
step, but the run duration was chosen so as to avoid significant model state evolution
during the run.

This diagnostic mode is often associated to the modeling of ice shelves and ice streams.
section :ref:`sec-ross` describes using a short "diagnostic" run to model the Ross ice
shelf :cite:`MacAyealetal`. Verification tests I and J, section :ref:`sec-verif`, are
diagnostic calculations using the SSA.

The NetCDF model state saved by PISM at the end of an *evolution* run (i.e. with "``-y
Y``" for `Y>0`) does not, under the default ``-o_size medium`` output size, contain
the three-dimensional velocity field. Instead, it contains just a few more variables than
those which are needed to restart the run with ``-i``. One can force PISM to save all the
supported diagnostic quantities at the end of a time-stepping run using the option
``-o_size big``. Or one can go back and do a "``-y small_number``" diagnostic run using
``-o_size big``.


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#] Note seconds are part of SI units.
